---
title: The SPL
layout: post
author: MegaWubs
categories: PHP
---

Yesterday I went to the [Nijmwegen PHP Meetup][nijmegenphp] for the fist time and heard an interesting talk about the 
SPL (Standard PHP Library) from [Joshua Thijssen][joshua]. He went from the bizarre to the awesome in a fun way.
  
The talk started with a brief introduction to what the SPL is, how old it is and what's wrong with it. Basically, it 
boils down to not enough documentation and bad naming. While the library is a part of PHP for a long time, there are 
not much developers using it. This is again for the lack of documentation and the, so I've heard, massive frustration
anyone faces when trying to discover the SPL.
 
### The TL;DR

So, what did Joshua tell us last night?
The SPL is awesome, but you need to know some of it's caveats otherwise you'll go completely nuts. And also the 
naming. The naming is just plain bad. Like: `RecursiveArrayIterator` does not recursively iterate an array,  
`RecursiveIteratorIterator` does!

### The LR (Long Read)
The first part of the presentation was about how a FilterIterator can help you to keep you business logic untouched,
but change the output of a iteration by adding a filter to it. This was new for me, and looked really good! But, not
it's not a part of the SPL.

One of the fun things I learned was that there is an interface in PHP that can not be implemented. Code like this 
will output an error:

{% highlight php %} 
<?php
 class MyTraversable implements Traversable
 {
     private $bar;
     /**
      * @var
      */
     private $foo;
 
     /**
      * @param $foo
      * @param $bar
      */
     public function __construct($foo, $bar)
     {
         $this->bar = $bar;
         $this->foo = $foo;
     }
 }
{% endhighlight php %}

When we try to make `MyTraversable` we'll get an error telling us this: 

{% highlight text %} 
Fatal error: Class MyTraversable must implement interface Traversable as part of either Iterator or IteratorAggregate
in Unknown on line 0
{% endhighlight text %}

Wait what? So, why is this interface here? Well, to let you and php internally check if something is traversable. 
What you can do is `$foo instanceof Traversable` This will work.

The next part was about the Iterator interface, (still no part of SPL). But it's the go-to interface to make an object
traversable. There are a lot of iterators. There is also the IteratorAggregate interface. It's an interface that makes
sure your object has the method `getIterator()` that returns an iterator. This is where the naming becomes 
confusing, because you assume `IteratorAggregate` is an iterator in itself because of it's name.
   
After this part of the talk, Joshua went on to talk about all kind of Iterators that are part of the SPL with a 
simple example. Lets say you want to read a dir, and do all kind of filtering on the files inside it. Naturally 
you'll put the filters inside the while loop of the `readdir` function. But, this can become spaghetti pretty quick!
 
For reading directory's, SPL has the awesome `DirectoryIterator`. This iterator can be used inside other filter 
iterators like the `RegexIterator`. All of this is done before looping starts. When you start looping over the 
`RegexIterator` (that has the `DirectoryIterator` inside of it) you only get results that match the `RegexIterator`'s
 settings. Awesome right? This way, we can build all kind of (re-usable) filters!
 
The thing I have still problem with to wrap my head around is this part of Joshua's presentation about Recursive 
iterators: "Recursive iterators add te POSSIBILITY to recursively iterate over data, you still need to implement it!"
So, if I get it right, this means that the `RecursiveArrayIterator` does not recursively iterate over my array's? 
Then why is it named that way?! Oh, yes he said something about bad naming. Good example here! To turn your 
`RecursiveArrayIterator` into a REAL recursive iterator, you need to make it a `RecursiveIteratorIterator`... Yes, 
now I understand why people run away from SPL...
 
But when you know this, it's not that difficult! Right? It might not be the best naming out there, but now we know how
 to use it, we can use it!
 
 This part of the talk I liked the most and is something I can see myself using. The part about data structures was 
 more of a "yea, right. So how do I use this?" The only thing I got from it was that they can sometimes be useful, 
 and sometimes not. Oh, and the php Array data type is just as good in most cases. So... yea... 
 
 Next, he talked about Exceptions. What I learned was that there are two types of exceptions. The 
 fist is Logic Exception and the second is Runtime Exception. The fist can be fixed by the programmer, the second is 
 just outside sources giving up on you (like a database that's on fire). Oh, and the people who crated PHP 
 don't really know the use cases of all of the existing exceptions. Yea, documentation...
 
Overall, I really liked his talk and had a great night. Met new people and learned new things :) I'll start playing 
with all of this soon, especially the whole filter and iterator things. They seem quit useful!
 
Thanks Joshua for an interesting talk, you've learned me new things! (and I'm sharing it, like you've asked ;) )


[nijmegenphp]: http://www.meetup.com/NijmegenPHP/
[joshua]:https://twitter.com/jaytaph