---
title: Setup Jekyll With GitHub Pages
layout: post
author: MegaWubs
categories: jekyll
---

### I wanted to write, not code

*If you want read about setting up a Jekyll powered blog, start reading [here][4].*

For a while now I've been thinking about starting a blog. But before I could write my thoughts down I had to have a 
system that could manage all of that. Knowing myself, I knew I would put hours and hours into the process of 
programming a blogging tool that would suit my needs. The idea of that kind of made me hesitant of doing it. Don't 
get me wrong. I like to code, program and toy with new ideas. I like it so much, that I also knew that I would never 
be done with my awesome blogging platform. It would never be as good as I wanted it to be, I would always think of new 
and awesome ideas to put into it. I kept putting it off. I even tried the new an promising October CMS platform 
to build my blog with, but I just forgot about  it. I wanted to write, not to have to code a whole lot of hours
before I was able to do so. I also didn't want to install Joomla or WordPress or anything like that. 
 

To be fair, I was thinking of excuses not to start. Because I knew when I was done coding and all, I had to 
write. I was kind of terrified by the thought, although I wanted it. What if no one would read it? Is it a way of showing
off? Like saying: "Hey see me, I'm awesome!"  All of those fears faded away and got answered with 
this [post][1]. It explained to me that writing a blog isn't about showing off, it's about learning. And if there 
are two things I like, they are learning and writing! I've always liked to put my thoughts on paper. 
I've read a ton of blog posts myself, and I figured it's time for me to contribute. As long as
I learn from the process, I'm happy! Once I heard about Jekyll I didn't directly got it's power, but after a few 
months when I finally got myself to investigate Jekyll I loved it! Here is my quick how to guide in installing it and
setting it up.
   
### Install Jekyll
Be sure you have [Ruby installed][2] (OS X has it by default, but if you want a newer version, that guide will show 
you how). To explain something that took a while for me to understand. Jekyll is a program that you install on your 
computer, not on your server. Yes, __not on your server__. _(you don't even need a server!)_

When you are certain you have Ruby installed, you can install Jekyll by typing the following command inside 
your terminal and hit return afterwards.

{% highlight bash %}
$ sudo gem install jekyll
{% endhighlight %}

This wil install jekyll on your computer. You ca now make a folder where you want to put your blog. Mine is in 
`~/projects/blog`. When you are inside this folder, you run

{% highlight bash %}
$ jekyll new .
{% endhighlight %}
_(don't forget the dot at the end, this tells jekyll you want to use the current folder as the place for a new jekyll 
powered blog/site)_

You can see Jekyll just created a bunch of folders and files for you to start with. Open it in your the editor of 
your choice and you can start adding posts to the `_posts` directory. Keep in mind that, when you create new files, you 
have to use a `YYYY-MM-DD-awesome-title.md` format for the name of the files, this way Jekyll knows how to sort your 
posts. When you type `jekyll serve` in your terminal it'll start Jekyll's auto watcher and server. To view it, browse
to `localhost:4000` or `127.0.0.1:4000` and you'll see the website generated by Jekyll! 

### GitHub pages

The awesome part about Jekyll is, that it is the engine behind GitHub pages. Ever visited the site from bootstrap? Or
any other open source tool that is maintained on Github? Changes are, it's a GitHub pages page. GitHub pages is a 
free service from GitHub that lets you host static websites. Yes, static. No server side programming, just plain old
text. But, we programmers are lazy. We don't like to repeatedly create the same kind of file over and over again. 
That's where Jekyll comes into play. I can only explain is as a build tool for your blog. It takes all of your files 
inside the root of you jekyll blog, looks into the `_posts` directory and converts all markdown files to html and 
generates a `_site` directory where your static blog is build. You only have to provide some information in the so 
called `Front Matter`. A basic example looks like this

{% highlight text %}
---
layout: post
title: Setup Jekyll With GitHub Pages
---
{% endhighlight %}



That is the bare basic of a Front Matter, it can hold a lot more (predefined) variables. These variables can 
be used later, when you start changing the look of your Jekyll website. But for now, lets keep with this.

GitHub can be used to host your blog, in other words. You don't need a personal web server! GitHub completely 
takes over the hosting of your Jekyll blog. All of that is possible, because Jekyll is the power behind GitHub pages 
itself.
 
#### Setting up GitHub pages
 
 To be able to setup GitHub pages, you need a GitHub account. To get one, go to [Github][3] and follow the 
 instructions. If you already have one, cool! Just create a new repository with your name and append it with `.github
 .io` for me it would be `megawubs.github.io`. Set it to public and don't add a readme. When you have created your 
 repository, go back to your terminal and inside your Jekyll root do the following commands
 
{% highlight bash %}
$ git init
$ git add *
$ git add .gitignore
$ git commit -am "initial commit"
$ git remote add origin git@github.com:username/username.github.io.git
$ git push -u origin master
{% endhighlight %}
 
 In order, the above commands will first create a local git repository, add all existing files to it, also add the 
 hidden `.gitignore` file (with default values from Jekyll), afterwards do the first commit, set the origin to 
 __your__  `username/username.github.io.git` and push it all to github. A little side note, when you use the 
 `git@github.com:` url, be sure you have your public key registered in your account settings.
 
 __now, for some magic!__
 
 Go to `http://your-username.github.io`, let it process a few seconds (it'll only take a few seconds the first time 
 around). And BOOM your site is live!
 
 Now, whenever you push changes from your local Jekyll blog to github, your live blog will automatically be updated 
 as wel. (in fact, your Gitub repo, _is_ your blog!)
 
### Domain name fun

You could leave it at this. It's perfectly fine to host your blog this way. But, for some extra sugar. Or, 
when you already have a host name, you can setup a custom domain with GitHub pages. To do so, you need to do a few 
things.

You need to configure CNAME record with your DNS provider. Sounds scary right? Well, actually it's not. It's just 
nerd words for telling your DNS provider (most of the time the same dudes where you have your hosting/web-server) 
that, when someone enters a sub-domain on your domain, it needs to do something. And with something, I now mean 
showing you your GitHub pages website. I'll explain below how it's done by [DigitalOcean][5]. First off, you login to 
your account, choose or add the domain you want to use. Click on `Add Record`, click on `CNAME` enter `blog` in the 
first field (or any kind of prefix you want). This will be your sub domain entrance. And in the second field type
`your-username.github.io.` __don't forget the dot at the end!__ Click create. This tells your DNS provider that, 
whenever someone enters blog.your-domain.com it has to go to the domain name you just provided.
   
__Almost there__

One last thing we need to do, is let GitHub know the url you want your blog to be available from. This is done by 
creating a file called `CNAME` inside your Jekyll root directory. Inside this file, you type `blog.your-domain.com`, 
just that. Add and commit the file in git and push it up to Github. If all is setup right, you can browse to `blog.your-domain.com` and you'll see your blog!
 
 
 [1]: https://sites.google.com/site/steveyegge2/you-should-write-blogs
 [2]: https://www.ruby-lang.org/en/documentation/installation/
 [3]: https://github.com/
 [4]: {{ page.url }}#install-jekyll
 [5]: https://www.digitalocean.com/?refcode=ee5c13d92c1c
 